---
layout: post
title:  "COLT: the Coding Literacy Trainer"
date:   2016-09-29
categories: research, coding literacy
---

I'm pleased to announce the alpha release of COLT: the Coding Literacy Trainer, an adaptive teaching tool developed in collaboration with Neeraj Chatlani, a Rollins computer science major.

Coding literacy is the ability to understand written computer programs. In the same way that reading is preparatory to writing, literacy is a valuable skill for novice programmers, because understanding written code requires developing and applying mental models of how programs execute.

Enrollments in CS classes are still growing, and more students are coming into the field from non-traditional backgrounds, often lacking some of the preprequisites (particularly algebra) that have traditionally been assumed for new CS majors. We think tools like COLT provide one means of bringing more students to success in their first programming class.

COLT generates a random program, presents it to a user, and asks a question about the program's output. As the user responds, the system maintains a learning model that keeps track of the user’s correct and incorrect answers. As the user demonstrates progress, the system unlocks new features and gradually makes the problem more complex.

Our learning model is based on a framework called Adaptive Intrinsic Curiosity. Inspired by [Lisa Meeden's work in developmental robotics](https://www.cs.swarthmore.edu/~meeden/), AIC attempts to identify the right level of difficulty for a learner, avoiding both "plateuas," where problems are too easy to be interesting, and "mountains," where they're too difficult. Neeraj presented an overview of COLT and AIC approach at the 2016 SIGCSE conference in Memphis.

Technically, COLT is a pure client-side web application. The learning model and random program generation code are written in JavaScript and it uses the Bootstrap framework for layout and styling. This combination makes it easy to deploy to students using only a web link: no downloads, installs, or server setups are required.

We're considering a number of future directions for this project:

  - COLT is currently a prototype tool. We're currently exploring opportunities to test it on real classes and gather data on its effectiveness
  
  - Random program generation is a key element of COLT. It turns out that generating "pedagogically effective" programs is tricky: we want to make sure the user has to read and comprehen every line and statement in the program. This is often not the case in programs generated by straightforward techniques, such as the recursive expansion of a context-free grammar. We've made some progress in generating more effective programs, where every statement is *relevant* to the final output, but more improvements are possible.
  
  - We'd like to produce versions of COLT for different languages. A good setup would have a single underlying generator that is transformed by an outer presentation layer.

A demo version of COLT is available [here](https://codingliteracy.github.io/CodingLiteracyTrainer) and the 
source code is available [on GitHub](https://github.com/codingliteracy/CodingLiteracyTrainer).

